hey guys welcome back to the channel so
after the insane success of the first
conjuring we got a sequel in 2016
and it was actually really good well
that's pretty rare
now while i do think that the original
was scarier overall
the conjuring 2 does have its creepy
moments in fact i even think that this
one
improves on a lot of things compared to
its predecessor but how did the movie
manage to be so scary
once again there are a lot of little
things and small details that work
pretty well to convey a sense of fear
so today we'll look at the hidden horror
in the conjuring 2.
just as a quick recap in the movie we
follow the hodgson family in 1977
they slowly discover that there might be
an evil entity in their home
and eventually the mother gets help from
the warrens they then realize that the
youngest daughter
janet is showing signs of demonic
possession and you may have noticed that
there are a lot of things
adding to the creepiness in the
background for example towards the
beginning of the movie the youngest son
walks around alone late at night to get
a glass of water
on his way back up we can see an old man
sitting in the corner barely noticeable
this is bill wilkins the previous owner
who died in that chair
he's one of the spirits trapped in the
house and look i know i'm not the first
one to bring this up
and it's not my goal to just show you
the easter eggs slightly off screen
there are quite a few great videos that
do that already but for the first part
of the video we'll take a look at a few
of these and explain the potential
meaning behind them
and their relevance to this story
because they might actually be used to
reveal certain details about the evil
spirits and the hudson family
anyways only minutes later the mother
goes downstairs and there she sees
janet in the same chair that bill was in
this sequence does two things
it already gets us to think about the
chair and makes us associate it with
something strange
which gets brought up quite a few times
right up to the end but much more
importantly it gives us a pretty big
hint as to where the story ends up going
now when you watch the first movie it
took a while to understand
what the demon wanted to do since
everyone was experiencing the attacks
about equally
this made us think that the bathsheba
spirit was after the whole family
it's only much later that we see it
possessing the mother but here by
showing janet in the same chair as bill
it gives us an early clue as to what the
spirit wants to do
possess janet this is confirmed later on
when we see janet channeling bill spirit
and there are a lot of things going on
just behind our characters that can give
us much more information about what's
happening
before it's outright revealed for
example one of the first times we see
the main villain
phallic who has the look of the creepy
nun we see it emerging from a shadow
cast by a painting and this painting is
the parent family home from the first
movie
again it's only much later that lorraine
tells ed that valik had an impact on her
since the events that we saw in the
first movie
so the demon who could have appeared
anywhere came specifically out of the
parent house drawing
and this might symbolize how valik was
already there affecting the warrants
during the parent case
now james 1 is no stranger to hiding
things in plain sight
he's done it in the first song movie and
there's even a small part in the first
insidious that does this
but here he also hid the demon's name in
the background which is significant
because for the warrens knowing the
demon's name gives them power over it
and you can see
vallec's name all over the warren's
house one time we see this is when the
warrens are eating breakfast and we can
see
valik spelled out behind both ed and
lorraine again i know i'm not the first
one to bring this up but here's why i
think it's so cool
later on we see lorraine confronting the
nun asking its name
she then unknowingly scratches valic in
our bible but
even though it's not shown in the movie
this is probably not the first time
she's done this since valic has had
numerous encounters with the warrens
i think they've subconsciously been
writing down its name the whole time so
it wouldn't just be an easter egg for no
reason
just how lorraine unknowingly writes
down the name the warrens have already
done this by
rearranging their furniture decorations
in similar ways maybe valik has been
giving them its name and making them
write it down the whole time
and they never know this would really
fit in with how valik is messing with
the family throughout the movie but
there are also a few strange things
going on which have to do with how the
jump scares are presented
and this is quite weird and i don't
think i've seen this too often
so there's a scene where janet is locked
in a room where there's a lot of
paranormal activity
when she's in there all the crosses on
the wall start turning upside down
as we slowly go across the room we
eventually look at an eerily dark corner
but if you look just hard enough you can
clearly see bill wilkins outline
before he even jumps out and i thought
this was really unusual
because jump scares are supposed to be
abrupt and they could have easily made
this area completely black
yet here it outright shows you what the
scary thing won't be
but surprisingly it really works at
least it did on me
i would lean forward and be like what
the hell is that and before you can
really register what it is it jumps out
at you this gives them a really
different feel
a rather obvious example of this is when
the mother is in the basement with ed
looking at the water damage
she initially sees a dark figure
approaching it but when he turns around
to check
nothing's there then when the mom looks
in the water we see
bill wilkins once again but much like
the previous scare we talked about the
noise actually comes a split second
after we see him we're given just a hair
of time to process
what's going on which makes it hit a
little bit differently it's
really subtle but it was also used in
the first conjuring movie
even though it's used a lot more here in
the original during the very memorable
wardrobe scare
we see the witch revealed on top of the
closet and it's silent only a fraction
of a second later does the noise come
through
here it also happens on a really subtle
level earlier on
when lorraine sees the nun for the first
time it comes out of this painting that
edgerow
but shortly before it emerges we can
actually see the painting change
its eyes start glowing in the dark
increasingly more aggressive
of course it could be that ed drew this
thing in radium paint only to prank his
family and pointlessly scare the crap
out of anyone who tries walking to the
bathroom
at night but i think the likelier answer
is that it shows that the painting is
becoming alive
shortly before it really happens because
in the conjuring movies the main
villains tend to have these glowing eyes
and i mean the glowing eyes were much
less pronounced one second ago
so we're given small clues as to what
the scares will actually be
now this isn't done with all the scary
moments there are plenty of times where
we don't really get a heads up as to
what will happen and there's a much more
traditional approach
but it's cool how they change things up
a little with this different kind of
scare
looking beyond this however there's
something that the movie does which
gives some of the scary scenes a pretty
sinister tone
so when we first see the nun the moment
has a really eerie chilling feel
at least i always felt it dead who's
that
i believe that one of the things that
makes it stand out is the nearly perfect
symmetrical framing
usually when we see the heartstrings or
the warrens they're at a bit of an angle
because that's more comfortable to look
at
but here the nun is dead center she's
right in front of us and it gives the
moment a much more confrontational tone
this happens again after lorraine
approaches the picture of the nun before
it jumps out at her
once again it's filmed in a more or less
symmetrical way
you can see it again and again in the
scenes where something scary is about to
happen
or currently happening for example when
it first becomes public knowledge that
the
hodgsons are experiencing something
strange a few local paranormal
investigators
not the warrens interview the family to
see what's going on
there while janet is speaking to maurice
gross one of the people
wanting to know if they're faking it she
channels bill wilkins
in this conversation bill reveals who
was possessing her and the details of
his death
and again we quickly get a number of
symmetrical shots
this head-on look makes it much more
uncomfortable than if we're at an angle
and here it's used among other things to
raise and release tension
but even though the first conjuring was
a lot more chilling with bigger and
better skiers this movie did something
that while not being quite as terrifying
made the scares a lot more meaningful
towards the end for example ed is locked
in the house trying to save janet from
jumping to her death on a sharp tree
spike but lorraine warns him not to go
since she had a vision that he'll die if
he doesn't wait for her to also find a
way in
here ed is at a crossroads does he go
upstairs to help janet and risk losing
his own life
or does he wait for lorraine to find a
way in to ensure his own safety but risk
losing janet
he has to make a tough decision and no
matter which one he picks
he risks losing the other this is one of
the best moments in my opinion since it
highlights the warren's weakness
compare this to the original where they
were pretty much invincible
but here they are forced to proceed
based on a best guess
moments like these give everything we
see a bit more weight we see that the
warrens are also merely human and they
don't have
all the answers this is much more
believable and leads us to sympathize
with them a lot more
so shortly after he decides to enter it
gets hit in the head with a piece of a
metal valve as it's spraying hot steam
on him
as soon as he gets closer to saving
janet he gets hurt now if we were to
look at the end of the conjuring 1
when everything was going crazy ed still
seemed in control
it never seemed like he was really
challenged but here it's much more
complicated
ed physically struggles as he's knocked
down his vision is blurred and he has an
injury on his head
he has to put up a real fight to achieve
his goal and he's severely outmatched by
valic
but this shows how dead serious he is
about helping the hodgsons
even if his odds of succeeding are
relatively low he still does it
if it were easy it wouldn't really seem
that threatening and it wouldn't mean
that much regardless of how many jump
scares there are
another critical moment comes when it
seems like janet is faking her
possession
one of the investigators and skeptics
set up a camera and it films janet as
she smashes a bunch of plates
intentionally by herself
which makes it look like she's doing all
of this for attention as they're
watching the footage which seemingly
disproves the haunting
we see both the warrens and maurice
completely defeated as they feel like
they've been totally betrayed by this
family that's gained their trust
here ed and lorraine once again have to
choose do they leave the family where
they saw that something weird is going
on
knowing they won't get the help they
need or do they stay at the cost of
their own reputation while also
disobeying the church
this is an important choice since we've
seen them earlier working on the
amityville case
that one supposedly turned out to be a
hoax so their credibility was already
significantly hurt
also lorraine wasn't 100 convinced that
there was something wrong with the
hotsense
unlike with the parent family where she
immediately sent something off
the warrants are a bit more lost and
their vulnerabilities are completely
exposed
this is an utter 180 to the last one
there it felt like
regardless of what happened they always
had a plan and knew exactly what to do
but here they're clearly overwhelmed and
we see them struggle with the case
also it's not like they always do the
right thing when faced with these
options
in this case they choose to leave and
prepare to head home which doesn't feel
quite right
there is a real setback and technically
speaking this is a basic plot point that
you'll see in many movies
the moment about three quarters in where
the heroes decide to give up because
they are not ready to face the challenge
however since many horror movies are
such easy money
it's not uncommon for good storytelling
to be completely ignored in favor of
more jump scares so it was good to see
that they actually tried to tell
a good story and all of this makes the
scares a lot more meaningful
and they sit with you longer the scares
feel like they matter
the same goes for the haunted family by
the way the parent family was pretty
happy to begin
with yes they've had their hardships but
we didn't really see any of that and it
seems like the demon was the only
problem for them but with the enfield
case we see that the kids get in trouble
at school and they struggle with
bullying when they come home there's a
single mother who
is completely overwhelmed by her four
kids especially since one of them has a
stutter
she's just asking to have a normal less
stressful life
we see that they're not doing so well
and then they get kicked while they're
down while they have to deal with the
evil spirit we
actually want to see them overcoming
their problems of which the demon
is only one part this is pretty rare in
horror movies most of the time the
characters don't really get much of a
backstory and the events just rush by
them
as they get spooked by a ghost a few
times but the scary moments hit much
harder when we care for the people it's
happening to
that's why in the saw sequels after like
the 100th trap
it doesn't feel that crazy because we've
only known the people in them for about
15 seconds if
it happens to someone we don't care
about well we don't really care
doesn't matter how violent or scary it
is by the way some of the techniques
used in the first movie to make you
uncomfortable make a comeback here
we especially see a lot more rolling
than in the first one but there are also
different tricks now when the scary
things start happening to the hodgson
family
there is a much stronger feeling of fear
from the family in my opinion
much more so than the first one it seems
like they always experience a greater
sense of shock when they see something
supernatural
when the kids first get attacked by the
demon janet gets a bite mark on her
shoulder
they show this to their mother who
quickly checks out the room
in there she looks under the bed but
only discovers the ouija board the girls
have been hiding
she thinks they're playing some sort of
prank on her and tells them to get back
to sleep then suddenly a dresser bumps
against the door
afterwards the mother sees that the
girls weren't lying
one thing you can quickly notice here
are these little arcs that are commonly
done
more often than not when they see
something scary we do this motion where
we go around them
as well as closer we talked a little bit
about this in the saw video where we do
a circular motion around amanda to
highlight a sense of confusion
and it has a similar effect here the
spinning around the character
underlines the sense of shock they're
feeling another example of this is when
billy is alone during
one of the first nights there he sees
one of his toys unexplainably drive into
his room
he then for the first time knows that
something is wrong with the house and as
he realizes this we do an arc where we
spiral
closer to him this movement immerses us
in the scene as it gives us a deeper
understanding of how the family members
feel
not just an understanding but we're
closer to feeling the same level of
confusion
and being overwhelmed that they feel
anyways those were some of the things
that to me
made the conjuring 2 a lot scarier all
the small details give it much more of a
replay value
as you can discover new things that add
to the story the second and third time
you watch it
and the many strong story elements not
only give it momentum but also a lot
more meaning so that the skiers actually
carry some weight
thank you guys so much for watching i
hope you liked it and that i get to see
you guys
in the next video bye guys